OSDOCS#11515:Add MicroShift observability via OTEL integration (#92758)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/microshift-otel-config.adoc

You can collect information from a MicroShift system using an optional MicroShift observability service. This service transmits data to remote endpoints for monitoring and analysis. This service is disabled by default. See [Setting MicroShift Observability configurations] for information about configurations.

[IMPORTANT]
====
You must specify an OpenTelemetry Protocol (OTLP)-compatible endpoint for each configuration, such as Prometheus, before starting {microshift-short}. If an endpoint is not specified, the observability service will not begin.
====

.Procedure

. Update the `/etc/microshift/observability/opentelemetry-collector.yaml` file to specify an OTLP-compatible endpoint with the following information. The endpoint must link to an IP address or host name, and port number of an OTLP service.
+
.OTLP-compatible endpoint configuration
[source,yaml]
----
exporters:
  otlp:
    sending_queue:
      storage: file_storage
    endpoint: ${env:K8S_NODE_NAME}:4317 <1>
    tls:
      insecure: true
(...)
service:
(...)
  telemetry:
    metrics:
      readers:
        - periodic:
            exporter:
              otlp:
                protocol: http/protobuf

>                 endpoint: http://${env:K8S_NODE_NAME}:4318

Reviewer: Do we need to also point that one specifically?
```suggestion
                endpoint: http://${env:K8S_NODE_NAME}:4318 <1> or <2>
```

>     endpoint: ${env:K8S_NODE_NAME}:4317 <1>
>     tls:
>       insecure: true
> (...)
> service:
> (...)
>   telemetry:
>     metrics:
>       readers:
>         - periodic:
>             exporter:
>               otlp:
>                 protocol: http/protobuf
>                 endpoint: http://${env:K8S_NODE_NAME}:4318 <1>
> ----  
> <1> Replace `${env:K8S_NODE_NAME}` with the IP address or host name of the remote back end. This IP address will resolve to the local node's host name. An unreachable endpoint is reported in the {microshift-short} service logs.    

Reviewer: I changed it in https://github.com/openshift/microshift/pull/4903 so let's keep it consistent

```suggestion
    endpoint: ${env:OTEL_BACKEND}:4317 <1>
    tls:
      insecure: true
(...)
service:
(...)
  telemetry:
    metrics:
      readers:
        - periodic:
            exporter:
              otlp:
                protocol: http/protobuf
                endpoint: http://${env:OTEL_BACKEND}:4318 <1>
----  
<1> Replace `${env:OTEL_BACKEND}` with the IP address or host name of the remote back end. This IP address will resolve to the local node's host name. An unreachable endpoint is reported in the {microshift-short} service logs.    
```

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
//  microshift_running_apps/microshift-observability-service.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="microshift-otel-config_{context}"]
= Configuring {microshift-short} Observability

You can configure {microshift-short} Observability after it is installed to identify a valid endpoint.

[IMPORTANT]
====

> You must specify an OpenTelemetry Protocol (OTLP)-compatible endpoint for each configuration, such as Prometheus, before starting {microshift-short}. If an endpoint is not specified, {microshift-short} Observability will not start.

Reviewer 2: OTLP compatible exporter is not mandatory, see all available exporters: https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/configuration/#exporters

Reviewer 2: @pmtk @copejon pinging you here in case I missed something from requisites.
All our example configs (small, medium and large) only use `otlp` as exporter, which is fine. But, as far as I understand, it's not mandatory to use `otlp` exporter, you can use any other exporter.

Reviewer: Is it about the exporter? I think this is about the backend.
Although "such as Prometheus" might be misleading.

Reviewer 2: I agree with @pmtk in this comment.

====

.Procedure

> . Update the `/etc/microshift/observability/opentelemetry-collector.yaml` file to specify an OTLP-compatible endpoint with the following information. The endpoint must link to an IP address or host name, and port number of an OTLP service.

Reviewer 2: You don't need to use OTLP exporter, it's not mandatory. You can use other exporters, see this: https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/configuration/#exporters

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * microshift_configuring/microshift_telemetry-service.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="microshift-otel-config-proc_{context}"]
= Configuring Observability for {microshift-short}

> You can collect information from a MicroShift container using an optional MicroShift observability service. This service transmits container data to remote endpoints for monitoring and analysis. This service is enabled by default. To disable the service, see "Opting out of remote health reporting".

Author: @pmtk I went with 'system' here.
